# A Practical Guide to Ansible

Why another Ansible guide? Because Ansible is a great tool, but the
existing tutorials overcomplicate the matters. While trying to pick up
Ansible for provisioning servers for various side projects, I ran into
a number of issues that were not covered to sufficient detail by other
online tutorials. The aim of this tutorial is to serve as a roadmap to
programmers who want to be productive in Ansible quickly, avoiding
certain pitfalls.

## What is Ansible?

It's a provisioning tool. That is, it does stuff on computers that you
want to repeat regularly. Its strenghts are:

* It does not need any extra software installed on the remote computer.

* It's fast.

* And most importantly: *It's idempotent*.

Idempotency is a property of Ansible playbooks. As [the official
documentation
states](http://docs.ansible.com/playbooks_intro.html#tasks-list), "if
you run them again, they will make only the changes they must in order
to bring the system to the desired state."

## How do I install it?

If you are a Python developer and have virtualenv installed, it's as
simple as creating a virtualenv and then running `pip install ansible`
inside it. Otherwise, refer to the [official
documentation](http://docs.ansible.com/intro_installation.html).

## How do I run it?

Ansible works over SSH, and does not require any special software
installed on the remote server. Principally, therefore, you only need
a computer which you can acces over SSH. The prefered method of
authentication is using private keys instead of passwords, due to
security and ease of use. The collection of servers on which an
Ansible playbook should run is specified in what is called the
**inventory**. The inventory lists the names of the computers together
with connection information such as SSH port and IP address. If you
already have a server to which you can SSH as root, here is what you
should put into a file named `inventory`:

    server ansible_ssh_host=IP_ADRESS

Since we will be modifying the system quite a bit, you are recommended
to use a server you can create and destroy at will. The easiest way to
do this is to use a VM, either locally or from a provider.  Depending
on which option you choose, the inventory file, the file which tells
Ansible how to reach a computer, is going to be a bit different. These
will be explained.

### VM

The easiest way to create and manage VMs locally is using
Vagrant. [Install it](https://www.vagrantup.com/) and start the
default Ubuntu machine with `vagrant init hashicorp/precise32`. SSH
into it with `vagrant ssh`, do an `ls` to make sure everything is
working. All right, that was the easy part. Now you have to copy your
actual SSH key into this VM. Assuming that the key you want to copy is
in `/Path/to/your/id_rsa.pub`, run the following command:

    scp -P 2222  /Path/to/your/id_rsa.pub vagrant@127.0.0.1:/tmp

If you are prompted for a password, enter `vagrant`, the default
password for the default Vagrant box. Now SSH into the machine again
with `vagrant ssh` from within the directory where it was created, and
run the following commands in order to add your key to the root
account's authorized keys:

    sudo su
    mkdir -p -m 700 /root/.ssh
    cat /tmp/id_rsa.pub >> /root/.ssh/authorized_keys
    chmod 600 /root/.ssh/authorized_keys

Now you should be able to SSH from anywhere on the host computer into
the VM as root. The default Vagrant box comes with the user `vagrant`
that has sudo rights, and one could run most of the commands we will
use for demo purposes with that user. The aim of adding the root user
is to make the examples uniform.

Last but not least here is what the contents of the inventory file
should be:

    server ansible_ssh_port=2222 ansible_ssh_host=127.0.0.1

### <a name="digitalocean"></a>DigitalOcean

The easiest way to create a DigitalOcean "droplet" is to use their web
interface. If you do so, don't forget to add your SSH key. It's the
last box at the bottom of the form before the "Create Droplet"
button. Just copy the contents of `~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub` or wherever you
have your SSH key and paste it in there.

In case you want to create and remove droplets liberally, and if you
are among the chosen few who can get a Python script with dependencies
working, you can use the `droplets.py` in this repo to create, list
and delete new DigitalOcean droplets. This script will create the
droplet with your SSH key already included, which will save you one
more step.


### Failing connection on server change

A confusing situation that frequently occurs when you recreate a local
VM, or wipe a server clean without changing its IP address, is that
Ansible (or simply SSH, for that matter) fails to connect, because the
fingerprint of the server changed. This issue is easy to
alleviate. Open the file `~/.ssh/known_hosts`, find the line that
starts with the IP address you are trying to connect to (and possibly
also contains the port, if it's non-default, in the
`[IP_ADDRESS]:PORT` format), and delete it.

### Ping it

Once you have your test server set up, run the following command to
check whether everything is working:

    ansible -i inventory server -m ping

As a response, you should see the following, anything else means
something went wrong:

    server | success >> {
        "changed": false,
        "ping": "pong"
    }

You're right, the above command is too much stuff for a simple
ping. The stand-alone `ansible` command is rarely used, though; it is
mostly for the purpose of testing individual modules. The above ping
command does the following: Use the inventory passed with the `-i`
argument to run the module passed with the `-m` argument. You're
thinking "WTF is a module", just be patient for another minute, OK?
The ping module does not need any arguments, but if it did, it would
have been possible to pass them with another switch. But as mentioned,
we are interested in more complicated stuff and not a crappy
replacement for `ssh -c`, so read on for plays, roles, and more.

## Plays, Modules, etc

There are only four fundamental concepts necessary for grokking
Ansible; if you understand these, you're halfway there. To make it as
simple as possible, here is a plain list:

* **Modules** are units of action. For pretty much everything you
    would do on a server, there is a module. They can be built-in or
    add-ons. Examples are ping, copy/modify/delete file, install
    packages, start/stop/restart a service etc.

* **Inventory** is the specification of a set of servers and how to
    connect to them. Ansible provides very convenient ways to specify
    sets of servers, and aliases for these.

* **Roles** are collections of actions that serve a purpose, and data
    that belongs to these actions. Examples are, installing,
    configuring and then starting a database server, or retrieving
    code, building it, moving it to servers and runing it.

* **Playbooks** are collections of roles to run on a cluster of
    servers, completed with more data.

So in effect, **roles are collections of module applications, and
playbooks are specifications of which roles should be matched to which
inventory**. Module application means that a module is applied to a
host with some arguments.

A sidenote: In the [official
documentation](http://docs.ansible.com/playbooks.html) it says that
"Playbooks are Ansibleâ€™s configuration, deployment, and orchestration
language". What kind of retarded bullshit technical writing is this?
Playbooks are not the fucking language, they are what you write in the
fucking language. Can't they pay for a fucking technical writer? Or
even an editor? Or just some sane person with a fucking highschool
degree who can proofread this shit? For fucks sake.

## Writing plays & roles

OK, let's get going. The example I want to cover here is the average
case of an RDBMS-driven website running on Python. What do we need on
this server? Well, first of all, you need to forbid root SSH access,
and create an admin user with sudo rights who is allowed to do rooty
stuff instead. The gods of sysadministan have agreed that this is the
right thing to do; who are we to contest that?  Not that it sinks your
server's chances of getting hacked, but I don't want to be the one
responsible if it happens.

Here is how a concise playbook that achieves this looks like:

```yml
- hosts: server
  remote_user: root
  sudo: yes
  tasks:
    - name: Create admin user
      user: name=admini shell=/bin/bash

    - name: Sudo rights for admini
      lineinfile: dest=/etc/sudoers state=present regexp='^admini' line='admini ALL=(ALL) NOPASSWD:ALL'

    - name: Copy SSH key to admini
      authorized_key: user=admini key="{{ lookup('file', '~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub') }}"

    - name: Remove root ssh login
      lineinfile: dest=/etc/ssh/sshd_config regexp="^PermitRootLogin" line="PermitRootLogin no" state=present
```

You're probably asking yourself about the format. It's YAML, yet
another markup language. The good things about it: it's neither XML
nor JSON. The bad thing: It's a markup language, and sometimes you
have to bend over backwards to get what the crappiest programming
language would get done in two lines of code. That's the way Ansible
rolls, so you'll have to deal with it. In this simple example, we are
listing the tasks within the playbook, which should be OK for a small
provisioning exercise, but it should be obvious that as the number of
tasks grows, and the inventory specification gets more complicated,
this method will not work. Each task has a name, which is more like a
description, and a specification on the next line. The specification
starts with the name of a module, and continues with parameters as
fields. [This list of all available ansible
modules](http://docs.ansible.com/list_of_all_modules.html) should
leave no doubts that nearly every need can be served out of the box.

In order to run the above playbook, save it in a file named
`playbook_simple.yml` next to the inventory. Or just navigate to the
`examples/part1` directory in this repo and copy your inventory into
that directory. Then run the following command:

    ansible-playbook -i inventory playbook_simple.yml

The `ansible-playbook` command runs playbooks instead of single
modules, and is where the real Ansible magic lies, so you'll be using
it much more often. When you run the above command, you should see a
list of the tasks by name, followed by information on whether anything
changed, and a final line that recaps this information. Here is what
you should see when you run `playbook_simple.yml` for the first time
on a fresh server:

    PLAY RECAP **********************************************************
    server           : ok=5    changed=4    unreachable=0    failed=0

This output will look a bit more bowine if you have the `cowsay`
command installed, by the way. Among the 4 tasks we had in our
playbook, all have been executed, and led to changes in the system,
thus the entry `changed=4`. If we run the same playbook once more,
however, here is what we see:

    PLAY RECAP ************************************************************
    server             : ok=5    changed=0    unreachable=0    failed=0

Now, `changed=0`, because the tasks do not have to be run, as they
would not lead to any changes in the system. This is what is meant
with *idempotent*; running this playbook (and ideally any playbook)
will not lead to a different system, no matter how many times you've
already run it.

## Who is Ansible on my server?

One thing that is relatively confusing with Ansible is who the hell
you actually are on a server. There are a number of different
configuration options, command line switches, and playbook options
that have an effect on the user Ansible runs the actions under. Here
is a tiny playbook that we will use to print the Ansible user (can be
found in `examples/part1/whoami.yml`):

```yml
- hosts: server
  remote_user: admini
  tasks:
    - name: Print the actual user
      command: whoami
```

In order to also see the output of this command, you have to run the
playbook command with the next level of verbosity:

    ansible-playbook -i inventory whoami.py -v

Here is the output we should see when we run this playbook on the
server that we provisioned with `playbook_simple.py`:

```
# bla bla bla....
TASK: [Print the actual user] *************************************************
changed: [server] => {"changed": true, "cmd": ["whoami"], "delta": "0:00:00.002952", "end": "2015-03-21 20:54:58.971190", "rc": 0, "start": "2015-03-21 20:54:58.968238", "stderr": "", "stdout": "admini"}

# a little more bla bla
```

So the `remote_user` instruction works; we are in fact `admini` on the
server. But what if we wanted to run a command that requires sudo? In
that case, we simply add the `sudo: yes` option, with the playbook
now looking like this:

```yml
- hosts: server
  remote_user: admini
  sudo: yes
  tasks:
    - name: Print the actual user
      command: whoami
```

which leads to the following output:

```
TASK: [Print the actual user] *************************************************
changed: [server] => {"changed": true, "cmd": ["whoami"], "delta": "0:00:00.001985", "end": "2015-03-21 20:56:51.932011", "rc": 0, "start": "2015-03-21 20:56:51.930026", "stderr": "", "stdout": "root"}
```

The default user which Ansible sudo's as is, understandably,
root. This can be changed, though, with the `sudo_user` instruction.

Supplying the user to connect as in each and every playbook can be
cumbersome and error-prone if you have many of them, so Ansible offers
an easy way to set a default for all playbooks in a directory, by
creating an `ansible.cfg` file and putting the following in there:

```
[defaults]
remote_user = admini
```

If you don't specify another remote user in a playbook, this option in
the config file will be used to determine which user to SSH as. There
are two more ways to specify the remote user. These are:

- As a command line option to `ansible-playbook`, with the switch `-u`

- As a part of the inventory, with the property `ansible_ssh_user`

The precedence of these options is as follows:

    inventory > playbook > command line > ansible.cfg

That is, specification in the inventory overrides everything else,
whereas the default value in `ansible.cfg` is, as the name implies,
only a default.

**Aside on specifying booleans**: You can specify boolean values for
  tasks and plays using pretty much any truey or falsy value, all of
  these work: `yes, no, True, true, TRUE, false`. In this tutorial
  `yes` and `no` are preferred, because that's what I see in other
  playbooks most frequently.

## Roles

Now that we have the basics covered, let's actually start provisioning
the server. We will start by installing a number of packages that we
need for the above mentioned scenario of RDBMS-driven website in
Python. The packages we need are PostgresSQL, Nginx, Git and
virtualenv. Before we install these, though, it makes sense to update
the apt cache to get the latest versions of these packages. Here is a
playbook that does all of these
(`example/part1/install_packages.yml`):

```yml
- hosts: server
  sudo: yes
  tasks:

    - name: Update apt cache
      apt: update_cache=yes

    - name: Install required packages
      apt: pkg={{ item }}
      with_items:
        - nginx
        - postgresql
        - git
```

Alright, we have ourselves a web and a database server, and the tools
to check out our code. Now we need to go ahead and actually check out
our code, and do stuff with it. It would be rather messy if we
continued adding more tasks into this play, however, not to mention
how we organize the configuration files and templates that will come
up later. Therefore, let's take the step mentioned earlier and
separate out our playbooks into roles. A **role** gathers tasks that
are conceptually coherent, and bundles them with some other things
like data and triggers. Roles reside in the `roles` directory next to
playbooks, and have the following file structure:

```yml
playbook.yml
roles/
    common/
        tasks/
            main.yml
        handlers/
            main.yml
    dbserver/
        tasks/
            main.yml
        handlers/
            main.yml
        files/
            pg_config.cfg
        templates/
            pg_hba.conf.j2
```

There are some new directory names there. The first is
`handlers`. These are triggers that can be registered with tasks, such
as reloading nginx configuration or restarting a service when it's
redeployed. The files that contain the tasks and handlers should be
named `main.yml`, meaning that you will end up with twice as many
`main.yml` files as you have roles, which honestly sucks. The third
directory, `files`, is for storing any files that have to be copied to
servers as-is. The `templates` directory contains Jinja2 templates
that can be rendered and copied to a server.

Let's move the tasks above that installed packages into a role called
`packages`, and use it in a playbook. You can find the playbook and
the roles in the directory `example/part2`. As you can see, the
directory tree becomes rather convoluted even for the simplest
role-based organization, but again, this is how Ansible rolls. Here is
how `roles/packages/tasks/main.yml` looks:

```yml
- name: Update apt cache
  sudo: true
  apt: update_cache=yes

- name: Ensure all required locales are present
  locale_gen: name="en_US.UTF-8" state=present

- name: set locale to UTF-8
  sudo: true
  command: /usr/sbin/update-locale LANG="en_US.UTF-8" LC_ALL="en_US.UTF-8" LANGUAGE="en_US.UTF-8"

- name: Install required packages
  sudo: true
  apt: pkg={{ item }}
  with_items:
    - nginx
    - postgresql
    - python-psycopg2 #also required by ansible
    - git
    - python-virtualenv
    - python-dev
    - postgresql-server-dev-9.1
```

This role, which installs the usual Debian packagese a Python web
application needs, is relatively straightforward, with the exception
of a loop in the last task. The `with_items` option enables looping a
task over a list, and replacing `{{ item }}` with the elements of that
list. This is equivalent to repeating the task with the list
elements. The double curly braces is the syntax used by Jinja2 for
inserting variables; more on this later.

We can include the above role in a playbook by listing it among the
`roles` attribute of a play. Here's the section in the `site.yml`
playbook where this happens:

```yml
- hosts: server
  vars:
    db_password: test
  roles:
    - packages
    - db
```

`site.yml` playbook consists of two plays. A play is a combination of
hosts, roles, variables, and other configuration options such as
`remote_user` or `sudo`.

## Handlers

Let's move on to the second role in the above play. The `db` role does
two things: copy an alternative Postgres authentication configuration
file (`pg_hba.conf`) onto the server, creating a time-stamped backup
if it differs, and adding a new admini user. The first of these two
actions requires a restart of the Postgres server. We could add this
as a manual step after the configuration file is copied over, but a
better idea is to have a handler that is triggered whenever an action
requiring a restart of the Postgres server is executed. Such triggers
go into the `handlers/main.yml` file in a role directory, and should
have the following format:

```yml
- name: restart postgres
  sudo: yes
  service: name=postgresql state=restarted
```

This handler can then be referenced from a role in the `notify` field:

```yml
- name: Postgres access
  copy: src=pg_hba.conf dest=/etc/postgresql/9.1/main/pg_hba.conf owner=postgres backup=yes
  sudo: yes
  notify:
    - restart postgres
```

A nice feature of handlers is that they will be triggered once in a
single play. That is, if you change a configuration multiple times,
the service will be restarted only once, at the end of the play, and
not with each configuration change.

## Variables

Variables in Ansible are what you would expect: placeholders for
values that might change according to circumstances. Using values is
relatively straightforward; you can use them pretty much anywere by
wrapping the variable's name in double curly braces, such as the loop
that used `item` as a value above. This syntax for variable
substitution, taken over from Jinja, can be used pretty much anywhere
in Ansible, but the more advanced uses of Jinja2 is restricted to
actual templates. In role and play definitions, only variable
substitution is allowed; it is not possile to use other Jinja2
features such as conditionals or looping.

Values for variables can be defined through the following mechanisms:

- **In the inventory**: Variables declared in the `var_name=var_value`
    format on inventory elements are available in the tasks that run
    on these elements. An example is the `ansible_ssh_host` and
    `ansible_port` we used above.

- **In a play**: Variables can be defined in the `vars` section of a
    play, and can then be used in any tasks that are part of that
    play.

- **As separate `.yml` files**: It is possible to include arbitrary
    yaml files with variable definitions using the `include_vars`
    module in a play.

- **As arguments to included tasks and roles**

- **From the command line**

- **Registered from a task**

- **Facts gathered by Ansible**

For precedence, see [the official
documentation](http://docs.ansible.com/playbooks_variables.html#variable-precedence-where-should-i-put-a-variable).


## Vault

Vault is the built-in mechanism offered by Ansible for encoding files
that contain sensitive data such as passwords. It is extremely easy to
use, as witnessed by the [brevity of the official
documentation](http://docs.ansible.com/playbooks_vault.html).

TODO
- the thing with quoting lines that start with curly braces
- the thing with vars in task names
- local tasks with /etc/hosts or /private/etc/hosts on mac
- different playbooks, such as looping with different apps to deploy whole thing, or splitting into deploy and provision